# GatekeepR

The provided R Shiny application is intended as a tool for modellers working with Boolean networks in the field of systems biology. It provides a ranked list of network components whose perturbation (i.e. knockout or overexpression) is likely to have a high impact on dynamics, resulting in a large change in the system's attractor landscape. Such a change is defined by the loss of previously existing attractors along with the appearance of new attractors which possess a high Hamming distance with respect to all attractors of the unperturbed system. The recommended nodes have been found to be sparsely connected and to preferentially exchange mutual information with highly connected hub nodes and have thus been named "gatekeepers". For more information on how this class of nodes is defined, please refer to the publication by Weidner et al., Bioinformatics (2021), entitled "Capturing dynamic relevance in Boolean networks using graph theoretical measures".
The original dataset of 35 scale-free Boolean networks which was used in this publication to determine the network measures most capable of capturing dynamic impact as well for finding the optimal selection threshold are included in the "OriginalDatasetNetworks" folder as text files readable by the BoolNet R package.

This method does not perform any analyses on the state transition graph of a network, which scales exponentially with network size, but relies only on measures defined by the network's logical rules and their resulting interaction graph. Thus, it can be used as a fast initial screening tool also for larger models. A selection of exemplary networks in the required txt or SBML formats is provided in the "ExampleNetworks" folder. The obtained nodes can then be analysed in further detail using software such as e.g. ViSiBooL (see Schwab et al., Bioinformatics (2017), entitled "ViSiBooL---visualization and simulation of Boolean networks with temporal constraints").

The application can be started by opening the server.R or ui.R files in RStudio and hitting "Run App".
Alternatively, the application is available on [the website of the Institute of Medical Systems Biology, Ulm University](https://abel.informatik.uni-ulm.de/shiny/GatekeepR/).
